welcome to topcast this is a very quick
episode
just about something that's going on
right now
and it's the volatility of
cryptocurrency and the reason i'm
talking about this
is because i see so much emotion out
there and of course this happens in
financial markets it's a really
curious thing about economics broadly
speaking
that in financial markets there's a lot
of emotion
and this is a really new innovative
part of the economy cryptocurrency ever
since crypto began enthusiasts have said
something like well
fiat money is fake anyways
well what's fiat money for anyone who's
brand new to this
well let's begin there government
controlled currencies
the dollars and pounds that we're
familiar with
have not always existed they used to be
based on something they used to be based
on the gold standard which is to say
your 100
represented 100 stored somewhere in the
form of gold usually
and if you wanted you could trade your
100 cash
for the equivalent amount of gold that's
called representative money
and it no longer exists around the world
as far as i know it was apparently the
american president richard nixon who
decided in 1971
to get a law pass that meant the u.s
dollar no longer represented
some quantity of gold so
the gold had a certain value based on
supply and demand
and the dollar was pegged to that it was
connected
to the value of the gold so the
government couldn't
arbitrarily at least not easily
change the value of the gold i guess it
could itself buy up lots of gold and
that would cause the value of the gold
to go up which would cause the value of
the dollar to go up
but it was hard for them to just
manufacture more gold
they couldn't create gold out of thin
air but when
the dollar was decoupled from the gold
standard in 1971 and the other
governments of the world
followed suit it meant that governments
could just
print more money create more money out
of thin
air now they could have you know with
the representative
um currency had just printed more money
as well but there would have been
legal problems with this after all the
law was
that the dollar was worth a certain
amount of gold and so
printing money in this way was much
harder so changing the law to a fiat
currency
by fiat you could just decide fiat means
you can just decide arbitrarily
and so fiat currency means the
government can just decide arbitrarily
the worth of the dollar now people don't
care much about this but they should
and with cryptocurrency it's entering
younger people younger people are more
interested now in economics than i think
they have
been ever before lots of young people
are getting
enthusiastic about cryptocurrency but
still
the typical consumer or taxpayer in the
economy doesn't i
think pay much attention to something
like the value of the dollar unless
they're traveling overseas or something
like that
if the government prints more money or
is being said to print more money by
economists
the average person doesn't seem to care
and the economists
seem to like this idea and one of the
reasons i like it is because it's called
modern monetary policy which is another
word for printing money
it's another word for socialism i'll
come to that why should any of this
matter
well because it causes inflation so if
you're a person who's watching this you
know nothing about
uh the financial system nothing about
how money is printed the relationship
between government and money
and what cryptocurrency is then maybe
there's videos for you it's a very
baby understanding of things and what's
going on right now as well
let's just consider an example and for
many people watching who usually watch
my videos this is going to be
teaching grandma to suck eggs you know
teaching something teaching you
something you already know but
be that as it may let's go on let's say
there's something out in the world there
that's
hard won something that's difficult
let's to produce let's say like
a banana okay it's not trivial to
create a banana my banana here i might
say is worth
a dollar and at the moment it's worth a
dollar precisely because
that is what i am charging for the
banana i might put it on ebay or
something say
buy my banana it's a dollar and it's
worth a dollar precisely if
someone's willing to pay a dollar for it
and not otherwise
if no one ever pays a dollar for my
banana then it's not actually worth that
it's it's worth nothing at all because
eventually
it ends up like this and then it gets
even worse than that
and if i don't eat it well if i eat it
then it has some value it adds value to
me
but otherwise it just becomes rotten
decays away into nothingness and that
worth that value is gone from the
universe
but if i sell it if i'm able to put it
onto ebay and i sell it for a dollar
then it's worth a dollar let's say i've
got lots and lots of bananas i'm a
banana
grower and i put my bananas onto ebay of
course it's not this simple i go to a
market whatever
it's a shame it's a thought experiment i
i take my bananas for a dollar and i put
them onto ebay and i start selling them
but they start to sell really quickly
now i noticed this i noticed they're
selling very very quickly
so i raised the price i raised the price
to five dollars per banana
but suddenly but now five dollars that's
too much of a price increase
and because they're so much more
expensive you get this
people will stop buying my bananas there
is a price point beyond which people
will refuse to pay
so if it's worth a dollar it's worth a
dollar because that is what someone's
willing to pay
but maybe i am selling lots and lots of
bananas really fast at a dollar
so i decide well i don't want to run out
of bananas
i'm gonna raise the price to just two
dollars and okay
the rate at which i sell bananas goes
down because not everyone can now afford
my two dollar bananas
but i can get away with selling them for
two dollars and i can sell lots and i
can make a lot more money
than before and importantly i can sell
maybe the maximum amount before i run
out before any of them
turn out like this what's that got to do
with anything well let's say the
government prints money
what happens then well suddenly lots of
people
in particular the government itself
we'll come back to that but let's say
the government itself
but if the government prints lots of
money and they have lots of dollars
the government agent whoever represents
the government can come along to me
with their two dollars and say
i'm gonna buy your bananas for two
dollars and they can start buying up all
the bananas
and of course what do i do as someone
selling bananas well i raised the price
of my bananas because apparently
the government who wants to buy my
bananas has an unlimited supply of cash
so i just raise it to five
now the person from the government
doesn't care why should they care they
can just keep on printing money
they can print as much money as i can
ask for
now not only can they can they buy up
all my bananas for whatever price
whatever price that i ask for
they can just print more money and
they'll be able to give it to me not
only for my bananas but for every public
good they can just start
buying it up and so the price of
everything goes up which is really bad
for everyone else
right because they don't get this money
that the government has printed
but the government needs to buy stuff
for whatever reason for its own
offices for its military for
paying back stuff to other governments
that it's borrowed money from maybe it
wants to send resources
overseas you know in the case of
australia we we sell our coal to china
let's say
so if we print the money and start
buying all the coal and we can send it
to china because maybe we've borrowed
money from china
for example the price of everything goes
up and if the price of coal goes up by
the way so does electricity
this that's how inflation works so
therein lies the problem
if the government prints money then that
causes the price of everything else
to go up to whatever the government is
willing to pay
and those people who can't just print
their own money are now forced out of
the market
no one can buy the bananas no one could
buy the bananas except for
the government person or you might think
well you're the government you know
you're looking after your people
if you're a good socialist you might
think to yourself well
why doesn't the government just print
money a heap of money
and give it to the people okay give
everyone a thousand dollars this has
been happening
recently around the world stimulus
checks
because of covert which by the way i
think is quite moral
because the government has stopped
people from working
and those people have here the two been
paying taxes so they deserve to get some
of it back
putting that aside if you're a socialist
you might very well think to yourself
well why doesn't the government just
print enough money so that everyone's a
billionaire
everyone is a billionaire we'll just
give everyone a billion dollars forget a
thousand dollar stimulus check
or ten thousand dollars give everyone a
billion why not what is the limit what
is the reasonable limit we can get
but seriously why not why not make
everyone a billionaire by printing money
and you see this kind of sometimes
people don't know
where to draw the line with things like
minimum wage they say
minimum wage should be raised to 15 why
not raise the 20
or 50 or 100 they say well the companies
can't afford it ah the companies can't
afford it
correct the companies can't afford it
but how do you know or the government
know what the companies can afford
companies typically make pretty low
profits and those profits get
reinvested back into the company to make
better products
as well as to pay the wages of their
staff and to employ more people
more people is the key thing you raise
the minimum wage they'll employ less
people
because they only have a certain amount
of money to
pay their employees and that that
quantity of money x
is either going to be spread among a
thousand employees
at 15 an hour or it's going to be
spread among 800 employees at 18
an hour or whatever the mat's worked out
to be you get the idea
they can't just arbitrarily start to
employ more people at a higher wage
businesses don't work like that now
minimum wage is
kind of like this idea of printing money
the universal basic income is kind of
like this idea of
printing money you're just giving people
more money when there's not more money
to give
because the money has to represent
something
unless you're the government and you've
got a fiat currency
and you can just print as much money as
you like
so i'm just going to put aside the issue
of minimum wage and
universal basic income it's related but
it's not the same when you just give
people money especially newly printed
money such that everyone is way more
wealthy
and for argument's sake we're thinking
everyone gets a billion dollars in cash
by the government
what happens to my bananas well the
price just goes up again just the same
as the argument as before
because everyone's got a billion dollars
now i'm not gonna charge a dollar for
this
i'm gonna raise it a hundred dollars
people still pay a hundred dollars won't
they because a hundred dollars to them
now
is nothing it's like it's what a dollar
was before
no it's much much different to that
actually they probably pay a thousand or
even ten thousand dollars for my banana
it almost doesn't matter because
there'll be someone there to meet the
asking price
and that's just for bananas of course
you repeat this for luxury cars and
computers you know
rolls-royce cars you know if everyone
became a billionaire in australia
the price of a rolls royce here in
australia would skyrocket
to well over a billion dollars because
someone would be willing to pay it
someone would have the amount of cash to
pay it
in other words your one billion dollars
you might be a billionaire
doesn't pay for anything anymore
it buys way less than what a billion
dollars did
a week ago before the government printed
all this money
that's called inflation the price of
things going up because there's
too much money out there now i mention
this all
for a reason fiat currency
of the kind that we have allows
government to very much control
the price of things in this way a
central authority
in in essence is controlling the price
and to some extent
the supply and demand because they can
print money for themselves and not for
others or they can even print it for
others as well
either way it changes the price of stuff
they've got their
hand on the lever of supply and demand
and therefore price controls
which is precisely what happens in
communist regimes
and this is what makes cryptocurrency
so attractive to many of us it's
decentralized it's anti-authority it's
at a
distance from the government it allows
individuals
to then exchange goods and services
between each other without the middleman
anymore without worrying about what the
price of commodities is that the
government is trying to set price of
bananas is
i can just deal with someone else
without worrying about what the
government thinks
the value of something is the government
is that middleman
especially when they're printing money
and they print money in an unethical way
for unethical reasons
namely to pay for things today they
cannot afford
right now and you might think well
that's what i do with a loan except that
the government is not the entity with
the money its population is
so they're borrowing on behalf of people
who don't want to take the loan out
the money that they have comes from
taxation
worse than that if they borrow money
today typically they're not even
expecting taxpayers of today to pay the
money back but taxpayers of tomorrow
or the next generation rather because
the debt is carried through
for decades sometimes there's no
guarantee that economies continue to
grow of course this is the hope
and this is the expectation it's the
expectation even of
someone with my worldview that thinks
that progress causes
knowledge creation which causes economic
growth
but not invariably and not with bad
economic decisions there's no guarantee
this happens
this happens given certain conditions
like capitalism namely the opposite of
what is going on
with modern monetary policy with the
printing of money
so the fact that governments can by fiat
one might say
print more money to pay their own bills
especially to their own people is
absurd and perverse this
modern monetary policy is absolutely
socialism by another name
crypto is a way out of this
cryptocurrency is a way out of this
not only is is cryptocurrency it's
impossible to
just arbitrarily print more
cryptocurrency it just does not work
it's not
only not allowed it's not physically
possible
but even if it were at least it's not
the government doing it
and and the other thing about crypto is
it's it's no one else's business
which is a wonderful thing about it like
it's not the business of the government
if
jane and joe decide to exchange crypto
for bananas
it's no one else's business everyone
else can keep their noses out of it
unless someone's being coerced or having
force used against them
it's not anyone's business if jane and
joe are engaged in a transaction
even today under normal circumstances
but even more so with crypto
yes and this is just brings me to today
people being upset about the volatility
of crypto
because yes there are liabilities with
cryptocurrencies
there is the volatility and perhaps
there will be for some time
even if the trend has been broadly
upwards there's no guarantee
it will continue to rise but nor with
fiat currency other there is absolutely
no guarantee
that inflation won't happen because the
government is not guaranteed not to
print money indeed
apparently they're just going to
continue to print money so inflation
is a real risk at the moment
there are liabilities with either
currency it's just
at least with crypto you don't have
government control and the ability to
just start printing stuff
and moreover all we need all is that is
needed for
crypto to continue to succeed despite
the volatility
that has hitherto been happening
especially over the last
month in particular it's just a constant
population
or an increasing growing population of
people to be involved in crypto buying
bitcoin buying ether buying the various
other cryptocurrencies
but that's true for a nation as a whole
you need
a constantly growing or at least stable
population if the population starts to
decrease then you encounter some
problems but as i say there are
liabilities there are some liabilities
with crypto but it's no worse than fiat
currencies indeed it's better than those
existing alternatives
the government is there
to resolve conflicts when
people otherwise engage in the use of
force
that's the ideal form of government
having government control the economy
finance printing of money is
abhorrent and it's causing all sorts of
economic
problems government need not be involved
in currency
because but currency is about it's ba
it's little more than the barter system
i have a banana
you have a pen you want the banana i
want the pen we're swapping
but but instead of like meeting up and
you know
me carrying bananas around and you
carrying around pens we have this thing
called money which is far more
convenient
and you know we've been carrying around
cash for a long time we've been using
banks to keep the money and that kind of
thing and governments are
getting involved as well they never
needed to be involved they never needed
to be involved in the first place
so crypto takes them out of it and why
not
what is government competent in doing
simultaneous with
this issue of crypto and me talking
about it
is the u.s government this has been
funny to me
the u.s government talking about
parts of the u.s government talking
about parts of the us military
talking about the fact they have footage
evidence
of alien craft or ufos
you know the kg about it ufos and i'm
just with neil degrasse tyson on this
you know it's it's
called an unidentified flying object
unidentified we don't know if it's a
flying object who knows what it is
my own favorite theory is well it's just
the u.s
military experimenting on their own
military why wouldn't you
this is done all the time it's always
been done historically this is what
militaries do
there is part of the military that tests
out other parts of the military i know
what happens here in australia
our special forces for example try to
break through our borders
to test out something called our border
force which isn't quite military it's
quasi military
you know they're the border guards and
if the special forces if our
sas the special air service can get into
the country
dressed as illegal immigrants then they
know they've found a weakness in
border protection now this sort of thing
happens you know
so why wouldn't there be a top secret
part of
the us military why wouldn't they be a
top secret part of the us military
testing to see whether
vast naval ships and fighter pilots can
be
tricked into thinking that there's
something there when there's nothing
there
could that happen and wouldn't that be
useful if they're invaded by the chinese
one day the chinese armada and air force
if they can flick a switch and suddenly
all those pilots are seeing
tic tacs wouldn't that be great it's
very distracting
that means that the us military now has
an advantage because they can distract
pilots
and why wouldn't you do it to your own
pilots first just to check out what
their response is
and then you don't tell anyone about it
in fact you so much don't tell anyone
about
it that your own military is absolutely
convinced they've encountered ufos over
the last few years
and they're willing to tell congress
about it and they're willing to go
public about it because they can't
explain it
meanwhile the top secret parts of i
don't know what the pentagon is just not
saying anything
or as various other people have said we
just
don't know the point is the point is
the government is made up of people and
a lot of these people are incompetent
who don't know anything
whether it's about currencies and
finance or
about ufos and military stuff even if
they're in the military
they won't know everything the military
of the usa is absolutely vast
who was talking recently oh yes sam
harris quoting
elon musk who was produced a graph
neil must produce this graph saying that
although the number of mobile phones
and the resolution of their cameras have
exponentially increased over the last
decade
the resolution of pictures taken of ufos
has not
increased exponentially it's remained a
flat line it's still
grainy and hard to see it's a bit
revealing
okay so anyway that's that my main
reason for making this video today is
just to observe
that there is volatility in the crypto
market right now the
price is fluctuating a lot people are
variously concerned
or bemused or elated the trend in the
long term
is nevertheless an ongoing rise can we
guarantee it will continue
not at all but the underlying
explanation
for why people want into this is
coupled to the same groups the people
who are interested in crypto the same
groups
aversion skepticism of government
interventions into stuff
and those feelings won't be going
anywhere yeah there's a whole other
group of people
the socialists and so on the people who
love the government who love the state
who want the state to have as much or
even more power than
they do right now they want the state to
do lots of things for them
employ them cure them treat them house
them give them money
they want a paternalistic state and
there are others who reject all that
and moreover want to extricate
themselves from part of the government
maybe not
all of the government but parts of the
government to try and get away
from this control as they see it of the
state
on the individual and those people are
increasing in number which means
that the number of people just in
general is increasing of course so both
groups are increasing
but these people that are interested in
crypto who have this skepticism of
government
and fiat currency and what the
government does with money is only going
to increase
and the number of places where crypto is
going to be
useful and used and accepted are only
going to increase as well
look it used to be the government
controlled information and in some
places
still controls information north korea
and china and so on
some of the parts of the west
governments are trying to control
information too and so-called big tech
is trying to
to do that but most people realize in
the west at least the internet now
the internet now is such that knowledge
of individuals
out there who use the internet is such
that
any attempt by a western government to
control the
flow of information is pointless
it's a pointless exercise the tech heads
and smart
people are in the main not inside the
governments
so it's it's not a fair fight at all
the smart people the tech savvy people
are outside the governments the western
governments cannot control the flow of
information
indeed in many places like the usa there
are laws and institutions in place
already that prevent the government from
intervening much into this area currency
is just another kind of information
that cryptocurrency is another kind of
information and so
any attempt to control this or to fiddle
with the knobs
and i think like elon musk you know he
first he said he loved bitcoin so the
price went up
and then he said he was out of bitcoin
he wasn't allowing people to pay for
tesla's bitcoin so it went down again
this is one of the liabilities of
cryptocurrencies for the moment
but they're a new technology and
eventually
things will stabilize but i don't think
they're going away
and i wouldn't be concerned about the
fact that for the moment
there is fluctuations in the market
because
it's a virtuous marker like other
markets as well it's providing value and
it's providing a means
whereby individuals can control to some
extent their interactions with each
other without having a third party
specifically the government getting
involved
because those people in the government
don't know what they're doing
they're not expert in much at all except
government stuff and that's not finance
that's
not information that's not science
that's a whole bunch of things that
they're not
expert in so don't be concerned about
volatility
this too shall pass